Add section about `Orleans.Concurrency.ReadOnlyAttribute` (#35765)
dotnet/docs: docs/orleans/grains/request-scheduling.md

---
title: Request scheduling

> description: Learn about reentrancy in .NET Orleans.

Reviewer: Was this left with "reentrancy" on purpose?

Author: I didn't leave it as "reentrancy", I updated it to "Request scheduling"

> description: Learn about reentrancy in .NET Orleans.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn about request scheduling in .NET Orleans.
```

### Case 3: the grain or method is reentrant

> :::image type="content" source="grain-persistence/media/reentrancy-scheduling-diagram-03.png" alt-text="Reentrancy scheduling diagram with re-entrant grain or method." lightbox="grain-persistence/media/reentrancy-scheduling-diagram-03.png":::

Author: ```suggestion
:::image type="content" source="grain-persistence/media/reentrancy-scheduling-diagram-03.png" alt-text="Re-entrancy scheduling diagram with re-entrant grain or method." lightbox="grain-persistence/media/reentrancy-scheduling-diagram-03.png":::
```

}
```

If this grain is marked <xref:Orleans.Concurrency.ReentrantAttribute>, the execution of `Foo` and `Bar` may interleave.

For example, the following order of execution is possible:

Line 1, line 3, line 2 and line 4.
That is, the turns from different requests interleave.

> If the grain wasn't reentrant, the only possible executions would be: line 1, line 2, line 3, line 4 OR: line 3, line 4, line 1, line 2 (a new request can't start before the previous one finished).

Author: ```suggestion
If the grain wasn't re-entrant, the only possible executions would be: line 1, line 2, line 3, line 4 OR: line 3, line 4, line 1, line 2 (a new request can't start before the previous one finished).
```

> The main tradeoff in choosing between reentrant and non-reentrant grains is the code complexity of making interleaving work correctly, and the difficulty to reason about it.

Reviewer: non-reentrant --> nonreentrant

> The main tradeoff in choosing between reentrant and non-reentrant grains is the code complexity of making interleaving work correctly, and the difficulty to reason about it.

Author: ```suggestion
The main tradeoff in choosing between reentrant and nonreentrant grains is the code complexity of making interleaving work correctly, and the difficulty to reason about it.
```

}
```

Consider the call flow initiated by the following client request:

```csharp
var slowpoke = client.GetGrain<ISlowpokeGrain>(0);

// A. This will take around 20 seconds.
await Task.WhenAll(slowpoke.GoSlow(), slowpoke.GoSlow());

// B. This will take around 10 seconds.
await Task.WhenAll(slowpoke.GoFast(), slowpoke.GoFast(), slowpoke.GoFast());
```

Calls to `GoSlow` aren't interleaved, so the total execution time of the two `GoSlow` calls takes around 20 seconds. On the other hand, `GoFast` is marked <xref:Orleans.Concurrency.AlwaysInterleaveAttribute>, and the three calls to it are executed concurrently, completing in approximately 10 seconds total instead of requiring at least 30 seconds to complete.

### Readonly methods

> When a grain method doesn't modify the grain state, it's safe to execute concurrently with other requests. The <xref:Orleans.Concurrency.ReadOnlyAttribute> indicates that a method doesn't modify the state of a grain. Marking methods as `ReadOnly` allows Orleans to perform several optimizations that may significantly improve the performance of your app. Consider the following example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a grain method doesn't modify the grain state, it's safe to execute concurrently with other requests. The <xref:Orleans.Concurrency.ReadOnlyAttribute> indicates that a method doesn't modify the state of a grain. Marking methods as `ReadOnly` allows Orleans to process your request concurrently with other readonly requests, which may significantly improve the performance of your app. Consider the following example:
```

```csharp
public interface IMyGrain : IGrainWithIntegerKey
{
    Task<int> IncrementCount(int incrementBy);

    [ReadOnly]
    Task<int> GetCount();
}
```

> The `GetCount` method doesn't modify the grain state, so it's marked with `ReadOnly`. Callers awaiting this method invocation aren't blocked by other requests to the grain, and the method returns immediately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `GetCount` method doesn't modify the grain state, so it's marked with `ReadOnly`. Callers awaiting this method invocation aren't blocked by other readonly requests to the grain, and the method returns immediately.
```

> The `GetCount` method doesn't modify the grain state, as such it's marked with `ReadOnly`. Callers awaiting this method invocation aren't blocked by other requests to the grain, and the method returns immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `GetCount` method doesn't modify the grain state, so it's marked with `ReadOnly`. Callers awaiting this method invocation aren't blocked by other requests to the grain, and the method returns immediately.
```
